# 28. SQL querying external data

Date: 2021-10-08

## Status

Proposed

## Context

XTDB should be able to access external data in the FROM clause. It
should be possible to do this without even running the ingestion
engine. But it should also be possible to query it together with data
stored within XTDB. Querying external data should not be allowed
during transaction processing, as XTDB has no control over it.

An external file will be coerced into Arrow if not already an Arrow
IPC file. Arrow comes with both a datasource (C++) and adapter (Java)
API to help load external formats into Arrow. We may or may not choose
to use these. They have Parquet, Orc, Avro, JDBC, JSON, CSV.

Example from IBM Cloud, where the table name is simply interpreted as
a URL:

SELECT foo.bar FROM 'file://tmp/foo.json' AS foo

Some other datbases use levearge different schemas to specifiy the
format (or source):

SELECT foo.bar FROM json.'file://tmp/foo.json' AS foo

SELECT foo.bar FROM external.'file://tmp/foo.json' AS foo

Another alternative is to introduce some syntax for this (like
JSON_TABLE etc.):

SELECT foo.bar FROM URL_TABLE('file://tmp/foo.json' FORMAT JSON) AS foo

If the format should be inferred or needs to be specified is an open
question. Sometimes one might want to specify other options.

https://github.com/apache/arrow-datafusion[Apache Arrow DataFusion]
has its own syntax to register external files:

CREATE EXTERNAL TABLE t STORED AS PARQUET LOCATION 'foo.parquet'

Many databases provide ways of mapping these external files via
schemas and views and then access them via normal SQL, hiding the fact
that they're not stored in the database. We could consider supporting
this eventually.

It's worth noting that the SQL standard itself has the concepts of
foreign tables and datalinks, together called
https://wiki.postgresql.org/wiki/SQL/MED[SQL/MED]. Foreign tables are
relational tables stored in another database instance, and datalinks
are URLs to LOBs stored outside the database, but not interpreted as
relational data. Neither of these are obvious contenders, this would
use standard syntax, but not be standards compliant, DLVALUE isn't
supported here:

SELECT foo.bar FROM DLVALUE('file://tmp/foo.json') AS foo

## Decision

## Consequences
